---
layout: post
category: artificial-infiltration
permalink: :categories/:title
---

#### Design Challenge

Create menus allowing creation and deletion of game save data, game setting modification, and game mode selection.

#### Development Considerations

Need to establish a bidirectional link between UI elements, saved data, and current game data. Changes in game data should both be saved and applied, as well as reflected back to the UI when the change occurs.

![Menus] [menus]

<!--excerpt_end-->

#### Then and Now Thoughts

"I need to identify the menu structure to properly set up the navigation. Some of these menu items will need to work with the game's save data. I can use that data to dynamically create some menu items. I also have to be able to delete and create data when the player wants a new game." 
**_- Past Me_**

"You did well with the data control throughout the menus and the dynamic menus left room for future expansion. However you didnt quite make the navigation easy to change when the design changed to exclude or add a menu in the structure. Reconnecting elements in the menu navigation feels like it could be an easier process. We'll figure it out some day."
**_- Present Me_**


![Main Menu] [main-menu]

![Mission Runner Menu] [mission-runner-menu]

![Mission Select Menu] [mission-select-menu]

![New Game Menu] [new-game-menu]

![Option Menu] [option-menu]

![Pause Menu] [pause-menu]

![Player Customization Default] [player-customization-1]

![Player Customization Shard] [player-customization-2]

[menus]:                    {{ site.url }}/assets/menus.gif
[main-menu]:                {{ site.url }}/assets/main-menu.png
[mission-runner-menu]:      {{ site.url }}/assets/mission-runner-menu.png
[mission-select-menu]:      {{ site.url }}/assets/mission-select-menu.png
[new-game-menu]:            {{ site.url }}/assets/new-game-menu.png
[option-menu]:              {{ site.url }}/assets/options-menu.png
[pause-menu]:               {{ site.url }}/assets/pause-menu.png
[player-customization-1]:   {{ site.url }}/assets/player-customization-1.png
[player-customization-2]:   {{ site.url }}/assets/player-customization-2.png

[MenunController.cs]:       https://github.com/Kpable/Artificial-Infiltration/blob/master/Scripts/UI/MenuController.cs
